## Generating the Schedule for the Website

This directory contains the data files and code used to generate the schedule for the NAACL 2019 official website. To do this, it relies on the code and data provided by the [NAACL 2019 schedule repository](https://github.com/naacl-org/naacl-schedule-2019), which is used as a submodule in this repository. This is structured in this way because it makes it much easier to allow syncing any changes in the data files much easier across both the websites and the apps and also allows for code sharing.

### Setting Up

In order to run the code in this repository, you first need to create a [conda](https://conda.io/en/latest/) environment. First you should [install miniconda](https://conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html). Once you have it installed, run the following to create the Python environment:

```bash
conda create -n naacl2019 -c conda-forge --file agenda/requirements.txt
```

This will create a conda environment called `naacl2019` which you will need to "activate" before running any of the code. To activate this environment, run:

```bash
conda activate naacl2019
```

### Contents 

There are two main files in this directory:

1. `generate.py` : This is the main driver script that generates the schedule markdown file for the repository. This script uses the classes defined in the `orderfile.py` module from the NAACL 2019 schedule repository that is integrated as a submodule in this repository under the `agenda` directory. It takes as input:
    - Files mapping the anthology IDs to the START / order file IDs.
    - XML files from the Anthology containing the titles, authors, abstracts, and anthology URLs for the items on the schedule.
    - An optional TSV file containing the title, authors, and abstracts for schedule items that are not in the anthology (e.g., TACL papers, non-archival workshop papers, etc.)
    - Another optional TSV file containing additional info about some of the plenary sessions (e.g., keynote abstracts etc.)

It also allows optional generation of icons in the schedule that link to the anthology PDFs and talk videos hosted on Vimeo/YouTube.

For more details on how this script works, please refer to the code and the comments in the script.

2. `frontmatter.md` : This markdown document contains the Jekyll frontmatter that needs to be appended on top of the HTML generated by `generate.py` to generate a valid markdown file that will be rendered properly by Jekyll.


### Generating the Schedule

The following command will generate the schedule markdown file for the website without the video and paper icons. This command should be run in the top level of the cloned repository:

```
python webagenda/generate.py --order agenda/data/order/manually_combined_order --output _pages/program/schedule.md --xmls agenda/data/xml/N19.xml --mappings agenda/data/mapping/manually_combined_id_map.txt --extra-metadata agenda/data/non-anthology-metadata.tsv --plenary-info agenda/data/plenary-info.tsv
```

To add the paper and video icons, just add the `--paper-icons` and `--video-icons` flags to the command respectively.